Compatible version upgrade (#1901)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

with its transport parameters (see {{transport-parameter-versions}}), or the
equivalent field in the version it selects.  The `unsupported_versions` field is
used to validate the version negotiation process (see {{version-validation}}).

The client MUST use the long header format and include its selected version on
all packets until it has 1-RTT keys and it has received a packet from the server
which is not a Version Negotiation packet.

A client MUST NOT change the version it uses unless it is in response to a
Version Negotiation packet from the server, or if the server picks a different,
but compatible version (see {{version-upgrade}}).  Once a client receives a
packet from the server which is not a Version Negotiation packet, it MUST
discard other Version Negotiation packets on the same connection.  Similarly, a
client MUST ignore a Version Negotiation packet if it has already received and
acted on a Version Negotiation packet.

A client MAY attempt 0-RTT after receiving a Version Negotiation packet.

The format of the packet that a client sends might be different in the new
version.  In this case, the client generates a new packet that conforms to the

> selected version.  Though different versions might convey information about

Reviewer: Aren't we requiring the client to always regenerate a packet, now that `unsupported_versions` change from an empty list to a non-empty list when receiving a VN?

Author: Ahh, I missed that one.  I squashed the other text, but missed that one.

Reviewer: Yeah! It's a gift to proof-readers :+1:

Connection ID fields in a packet that the client sent.  If this check fails, the
packet MUST be discarded.

> A client MUST ignore a Version Negotiation packet that lists the client's chosen

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A client MUST discard a Version Negotiation packet that lists the client's chosen
```
This is a minor nit.  Let's keep the wording consistent.  Word "discard" was used in a sentence above.

packet MUST be discarded.

Once the Version Negotiation packet is determined to be valid, the client then
selects an acceptable protocol version from the list provided by the server. The
client MUST choose the version that it most prefers from those supported by the
server.  The server will abort the connection attempt if the client chooses in a
manner inconsistent from the preference order included with the client transport
parameters (see {{version-validation}}).

The client then attempts to create a connection using the version it selects.
Though the content of the Initial packet the client sends might not change in
response to version negotiation, a client MUST increase the packet number it

> uses on every packet it sends.  Packets MUST continue to use long headers

Reviewer 3: Is this saying that even if the client creates an entirely new connection state it needs to increase the packet number still? I assume that wasn't intended. Perhaps `Though the content of the Initial packet the client sends might not change in response to version negotiation, a client MUST increase the packet number it uses on every packet it sends.` should be changed to something like `If the content of the Initial packet the client sends does not change in response to version negotiation, a client MUST increase the packet number it uses on every packet it sends.`?

({{long-header}}) and MUST include the new negotiated protocol version.

The client MUST use the long header format and include its selected version on
all packets until it has 1-RTT keys and it has received a packet from the server
which is not a Version Negotiation packet.

A client MUST NOT change the version it uses unless it is in response to a
Version Negotiation packet from the server, or if the server picks a different,
but compatible version (see {{version-upgrade}}).  Once a client receives a
packet from the server which is not a Version Negotiation packet, it MUST
discard other Version Negotiation packets on the same connection.  Similarly, a
client MUST ignore a Version Negotiation packet if it has already received and

> acted on a Version Negotiation packet.

Reviewer 3: Is it not theoretically possible that a client (that supports A,B,C) sends version A, and the server supports version {B, C} and responds with a version negotiation packet. THEN the server is updated to support only {C}. The client responds to the VN with B, and then gets a new VN in response, and would want to then try C? It's a pretty crappy experience and extremely small edge case, but I think possible.

Reviewer 4: The client is not allowed to respond to version {C} because it is only allow to handle one VN packet (which is important to avoid loops). But as I wrote, a client could make a new connection attempt which amounts to the same thing, so stricly speaking the connection would fail on timeout as the second VN packet is ignored.

claims to support.  Similarly, a client MUST NOT change what it reports as the
version it first attempted to use.

Version negotiation packets have no cryptographic protection.  Keeping
version-related information consistent between versions is critical for
validation of the choice of version (see {{version-validation}}).

## Compatible Version Upgrade {#version-upgrade}

The first packet sent by a client uses a QUIC version selected by the client.
In this version of QUIC, this packet also includes transport parameters.  Those
transport parameters include a list of QUIC versions the client supports.

A server that understands the version selected by the client can extract the
list of QUIC versions and select an alternative version from the list of
supported versions.  A server MAY choose a compatible version from that list and
continue the handshake with that version.  The server sends its first packet as
though it was continuing with the version it selects.

A QUIC version is compatible with this version if the cryptographic handshake
message sent in the first packet can be used in both versions.  A compatible

> version is also able to identifying and acknowledge the first packet sent by the

Reviewer 5: s/identifying/identify

client in some fashion.  Other QUIC versions might have different constraints in
determining what is compatible.  In order to facilitate this process, new QUIC
versions could define a process for transforming the first packet from other
compatible versions into the equivalent packet in the new version.

Upgrading in this manner allows a server to upgrade without incurring the round
trip imposed by sending a Version Negotiation packet.  It also allows clients to

> send their first packet using a widely deployed version, without the risk of

Reviewer 5: There’s no incentive to use a widely deployed version any more. A client can use the highest (compatible) version, and the server would just downgrade it to the highest version it supports.

Reviewer 4: The server might not know that there is a newer compatible version - compatible is both a spec thing and an implementation thing.

Author: Thinking of versions as being ordered is helpful, but might be constraining.  The point is that the client will use the most widely deployed to start with and accept that the server is able to choose a compatible version.  The client *hopes* that the server will choose a version that it prefers more, but leaves that to the server to decide.

In the case of monotonically increasing versions where A >> B >> C, this might seem obvious, but it's still possible that the client will advertise B and get an apparent downgrade to C.  That's a property of the design that I don't think we'll see that often, but it's nonetheless theoretically possible.

But as @kazuho says, the expected case is a client advertising vN, then being opportunistically upgraded to vN+1.  Like today, you can rely on TLS 1.0 being available widely, but you might prefer TLS 1.3.

Reviewer 6: The TLS comparison is somewhat inapt, since in TLS you actually do offer your highest (most preferred) version and let the server select a compatible, less-preferred version if it doesn't support that one.  QUIC can't do that because the contents of the Initial aren't invariant.

having to use that version with servers that supports a more-preferred version.

A server MUST NOT send a Version Negotiation packet if it prefers a version that
is not compatible with the version the client initially chose; a server has to

> allow the client to choose between versions that are not compatible.

Reviewer 5: Do we need some text what a client is supposed to do when it receives a VNP that includes a compatible version to the one it initially selected?

> 

Reviewer 4: What if the client wants to use a specific other version if possible, but it does not want to do it in-flight within the current connection, for example to keep the client simple? It cannot omit that version from TP because then the current version will continue. It cannot include that version in TP because then it might get in-flight version change.

Reviewer 5: What’s the use case for this? I don’t really see the point of “keeping the client simple” here, this is not one of the complex areas of the protocol.

Reviewer 4: If you implement each version as a separate binary or in a separate process. You could send on the that other version instead and hope the best, but that could result in many unnecessary version negotations if that version is not (yet) widely supported.

client that sends additional 0-RTT packets MUST NOT reset the packet number to 0
as a result, see {{retry-0rtt-pn}}.

The format of the packet that a client sends might be different in the new
version.  In this case, the client generates a new packet that conforms to the
selected version.  Though different versions might convey information about
versions differently, a client MUST send both its first attempted version and
the list of versions it claims to support in preference order.

Version negotiation packets have no cryptographic protection.  Keeping
version-related information consistent between versions is critical for
validation of the choice of version (see {{version-validation}}).

## Compatible Version Upgrade {#version-upgrade}

The first packet sent by a client uses a QUIC version selected by the client.
In this version of QUIC, this packet also includes transport parameters.  Those

> transport parameters includes the version the client first attempts to use, plus

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transport parameters include the version the client first attempts to use, plus
```

a list of QUIC versions the client supports in the order that the client prefers
them.

A server that understands the version selected by the client can extract the
list of QUIC versions and select an alternative version from the list of

> supported versions.  A server MAY choose version from that list that is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
supported versions.  A server MAY choose a version from that list that is
```

continuing with the version it selects.

A QUIC version is compatible with another version if the cryptographic handshake
message sent in the first packet can be used in both versions.  A compatible
version is also able to identify and acknowledge the first packet sent by the
client in some fashion.  Other QUIC versions might have different constraints in
determining what is compatible.  In order to facilitate this process, new QUIC
versions could define a process for transforming the first packet from other
compatible versions into the equivalent packet in the new version.

Upgrading in this manner allows a server to upgrade without incurring the round
trip imposed by sending a Version Negotiation packet.  It also allows clients to
send their first packet using a widely deployed version, without the risk of
having to use that version with servers that supports a more-preferred version.

A server MUST NOT send a Version Negotiation packet if it prefers a version that
is not compatible with the version the client initially chose; a server has to
allow the client to choose between versions that are not compatible.

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we have some text that says what to do if the server's supported list doesn't overlap at all with the client's? Should it still send a VN, even though it knows the client won't be able to continue the connection? I didn't see any text talking about that case.

Reviewer 4: Since you wrote this, new text appeared requiring a connection abort if a VN with no overlap is received. If the server has implicit knowledge about what the client supports it doesn't change anything - either it goes forward with a compatible version or it sends a VN packet.

* authenticated negotiation of an application protocol (TLS uses ALPN
  {{?RFC7301}} for this purpose)

The first cryptographic handshake message from a client is subject to several
requirements:

1. The first message MUST be sent in a single packet.  Any second attempt that
   is triggered by address validation (see {{validate-handshake}}) MUST also be
   sent within a single packet.  This avoids having to reassemble a message from
   multiple packets at a server.

2. The first message MUST include the transport parameters chosen by the client.
   This enables upgrade to a compatible version (see {{version-upgrade}}).

> 3. The first message MUST fit within a 1232 octet QUIC packet payload.  This

Reviewer 5: Isn’t this already implied by 1.?

* authenticated negotiation of an application protocol (TLS uses ALPN
  {{?RFC7301}} for this purpose)

The first cryptographic handshake message from a client MUST be sent in a single
packet.  Consequently, the first cryptographic handshake message is limited in
size; see Section 4.3 of {{QUIC-TLS}} for details.  Any second attempt that is
triggered by address validation (see {{validate-handshake}}) MUST also be sent
within a single packet.  This avoids having to reassemble a message from
multiple packets at a server.

> 

Reviewer 7: Did you intend to drop this in this PR?

## Transport Parameters {#transport-parameters}

During connection establishment, both endpoints make authenticated declarations
of their transport parameters, which are a set of key-value pairs.  These
declarations are made unilaterally by each endpoint.  Endpoints are required to
comply with the restrictions implied by these parameters; the definition of each
transport parameter includes rules for its handling.

The encoding of the transport parameters is detailed in
{{transport-parameter-encoding}}.  Transport parameters are key-value pairs.
Definitions and rules for encoding for each of the defined transport parameters
are included in {{transport-parameter-definitions}}.

QUIC includes the encoded transport parameters in the cryptographic handshake.
Once the handshake completes, the transport parameters declared by the peer are
available.  Each endpoint validates the value provided by its peer.  Successful
validation of transport parameters MUST be completed before a connection is
considered successfully established.

A client also includes a list of supported versions along with its transport
parameters.  Transport parameters are carried in the first packet the client

> sends.  Sending the list of supported versions enables upgrade between

Reviewer 5: s/upgrade/upgrades

Though the cryptographic handshake has integrity protection, two forms of QUIC
version downgrade are possible.  In the first, an attacker replaces the QUIC
version in the Initial packet.  In the second, a fake Version Negotiation packet
is sent by an attacker.

To protect against these attacks, the transport parameters includes the complete

> list of versions that a client is willing to use, with the version they used for

Reviewer 5: s/they/it

sending the first packet in the first entry.  Including this information in the
cryptographic handshake provides it with integrity protection, and allows the
server to detect version downgrade attacks.

The client MUST include the first QUIC version it attempts to use as the first
entry of the supported_versions list in the transport parameters.  A server MUST

> close the connection attempt with a VERSION_NEGOTIATION_ERROR if it supports the

Reviewer 5: This sentence has some leftover parts, I assume.

Reviewer: My understanding is that the intent of the text is to detect version downgrade attack at the server-side instead of doing on the client-side. IMO we need to make the change; see #1810.

However, I am not sure if the proposed design is sufficient, because it only detects a repression of only "one version" (being identified the first entry of supported_versions), while an attacker can inject VN to repress multiple versions.

Consider the case where a client supports three versions, v3, v2, v1 talking to a server that supports v2 and v1. Assume that the use of newer versions are preferable than the older ones. The client uses v3 in it's initial attempt. The attacker intercepts the Initial packet and responds with a fake VN that advertises v1 only. In such case, the server will not notice the downgrade attack and the connection will be established using v1.

IMO, it might make sense to send a list of versions that the client preferred but was unable to use due to the values included in VN that it received.

Author: Oh, so that would be the case where the v2 and v1 are not compatible, that is, the server has to respect the client's choice between v1 and v2.  In this case, we're not respecting the client's preferences.  I think that I'll have to take @ekr's design here to fix that.  That is, the client advertises the version it attempts first, then it provides a list in preference order.  Then validation at the server goes thus:

original version is supported, but not the current version = error
client prefers an incompatible version over the current version and the preferred version is supported by the server = error

Does that sound right?

first entry in the list it receives is supported and does not match the version
of the QUIC packet.  The server MAY choose to upgrade to a compatible version,
as defined in {{version-upgrade}}.

Different QUIC versions might define transport parameters, or their equivalent,
using a different format.  However, the version field in the QUIC packet header
is authenticated using transport parameters.  The position and the format of the
version fields in transport parameters therefore MUST either be identical across
different QUIC versions, or be unambiguously different to ensure no confusion
about their interpretation.  One way that a new format could be introduced is to
define a TLS extension with a different codepoint.

> Transport parmeters for QUIC versions that are compatible with this QUIC version

Reviewer 5: Parameters.

Though the cryptographic handshake has integrity protection, two forms of QUIC
version downgrade are possible.  In the first, an attacker replaces the QUIC
version in the Initial packet.  In the second, a fake Version Negotiation packet
is sent by an attacker.

To protect against these attacks, the transport parameters includes both the

> original version the client uses with its first packet, a complete list of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
original version the client uses with its first packet and a complete list of
```

versions that a client is willing to use in preference order.  Including this
information in the cryptographic handshake provides it with integrity
protection, and allows the server to detect version downgrade attacks.

The client MUST include the first QUIC version it attempts to use in the
original_version field of its transport parameters.  A server MUST abort the
connection attempt with a VERSION_NEGOTIATION_ERROR if it supports the version
in the original_version field and that version does not match the version of the
Initial packet from the client.

The client MUST include the versions it claims to support in preference order in
the supported_versions field of its transport parameters.  A server MUST abort
the connection attempt with a VERSION_NEGOTIATION_ERROR if the Initial packet
from the client contains a version that is less preferred by the client than any
version it supports, unless that version also matches the original_version
field.

> <!-- Editor's note: should I include this algorithm?

Reviewer 3: 👍 I find it useful.

{: #figure-transport-parameters title="Definition of TransportParameters"}

The `extension_data` field of the quic_transport_parameters extension defined in
{{QUIC-TLS}} contains a TransportParameters value.

QUIC encodes transport parameters into a sequence of octets, which are then
included in the cryptographic handshake.

## Version Validation Fields {#transport-parameter-versions}

Client and server exchange information about versions along with transport
parameters in order to protect against version downgrade attacks (see
{{version-validation}}).

The `supported_versions` field is a list of the versions the client supports.
This field enables upgrade to compatible versions (see {{version-upgrade}}).  A
client MAY omit versions from this list if they appear in the
`unsupported_versions` field.

The `unsupported_versions` field is a list of the versions the client supports,
but which the client believes that the server does not support.  This list MUST
be empty unless the client has received and processed a Version Negotiation
packet.  A client MUST NOT omit a version that it supports from
`unsupported_versions`, unless the Version Negotiation packet it processed

> listed that version.

Reviewer: I wonder if this _unless_ clause contradicts with the following sentence added above: _Though different versions might convey information about versions differently, a client MUST NOT change the set of versions it claims to support._

Author: Hmm, the text isn't *wrong*, but I'm not sure how to fix it.  The set of versions that a client claims to support is the union of `supported_versions` and `unsupported_versions`.  I've said that, but I think that there's a better way to structure the text to avoid having to say that.

{: #figure-transport-parameters title="Definition of TransportParameters"}

The `extension_data` field of the quic_transport_parameters extension defined in
{{QUIC-TLS}} contains a TransportParameters value.

QUIC encodes transport parameters into a sequence of octets, which are then
included in the cryptographic handshake.

## Version Validation Fields {#transport-parameter-versions}

> Client and server exchange information about versions along with transport

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Client and server exchange information about versions in transport
```

Author: I have tried to make this separation clearer.  That is, there are transport parameters, and then there is the version negotiation info.  It makes talking about transport parameters easier.
